Revamp roadmap doc (#1110)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/roadmap.md

---

# Roadmap
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Architecture

_TL;DR_ - After receiving feedback on early versions of lakeFS, project **["lakeFS on the Rocks"](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jzD7-jun-tdU5BGapmnMBe9ovSzBvTNjXCcVztV07A4/edit?usp=sharing){:target="_blank"}** represents a set of changes to the architecture and data model of lakeFS. The main motivators are simplicity, reduced barriers of entry, scalability -  and the added benefit of having lakeFS adhere more closely to Git in semantics and UX.
{: .note .note-warning }

There are 3 big shifts in design:

1. Using the underlying object store as a source of truth for all committed data. We do this by storing commits as RocksDB SSTable files, where each commit is a “snapshot” of a given repository, split across multiple SSTable files that could be reused across commits.
1. Removal of PostgreSQL as a dependency: scaling it for very high throughput while keeping it predictable in performance for different loads and access patterns has a very high operational cost.

> 1. Separating out the metadata operations into a separate service (with the S3 API Gateway remaining as a stateless client for this service). Would allow for the development of “native” clients for big data tools that don’t require passing the data itself through lakeFS, but rather talk directly to the underlying object store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Extract metadata operations into a separate service (with the S3 API Gateway remaining as a stateless client for this service). Would allow for the development of “native” clients for big data tools that don’t require passing the data itself through lakeFS, but rather talk directly to the underlying object store.
```

master ensures schema never breaks and all partitions are complete and tested)

### Webhook Support integration: Metastore registration
Using webhooks, we can automatically register or update collections in a Hive/Glue metastore, using [Symlink Generation](https://docs.lakefs.io/using/glue_hive_metastore.html#create-symlink), this will also allow systems that don’t natively integrate with lakeFS to consume data produced using lakeFS.

### Webhook Support integration: Metadata validation
Provide a basic wrapper around something like [pyArrow](https://pypi.org/project/pyarrow/) that validates Parquet or ORC files for common schema problems such as backwards incompatibility.

## Use Case: Continuous Deployment

### Airflow Operators
Provide a set of reusable building blocks for Airflow that can create branches, commit and merge. The idea here is to enhance existing pipelines that, for example, run a series of Spark jobs, with an easy way to create a lakeFS branch before starting, passing that branch as a parameter to all Spark jobs, and upon successful execution, commit and merge their output to master.

### Webhook Support integration: Data Quality testing

> Provide a webhook around a tool such as [Great Expectations](https://greatexpectations.io/) that runs data quality tests before merging into a main/master branch.

Reviewer: This is already mentioned above

Author: before we give it as an example of why webhooks would allow awesome things, this is the actual, awesome thing :)
